CLIENT CONFIDENTIAL
This document is intended for the internal use of recipients only and may not be
distributed externally or reproduced for external distribution in any form without express
written permission of ConsultAndes, S.A.
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC BRIEFING – SEPTEMBER 2002
1.) Palace continues to stumble over self-inflicted wounds
President Alejandro Toledo’s decline in public opinion polls continued in September, due
mainly to mistakes made by the President, his Cabinet and First Lady Eliane Karp. A
late-September poll by the University of Lima put the President’s popularity at 16.3
percent, two points lower than a similar poll by the university in August. Another survey
firm, IDICE, had Toledo’s popularity falling to only 11 percent. IDICE is linked to the
opposition APRA party led by former President Alan Garcia. Both polls showed that
presidential mistakes have contributed significantly to a loss of credibility in the
President and his administration as a whole. Premier Luis Solari is the only Cabinet
member with a negative rating below 50 percent.
According to the University of Lima poll, faring worst among the Palace figures is First
Lady Karp, who received a negative rating of 80 percent. Karp’s problems began in
August, when the Palace lied about her whereabouts, first saying she had traveled to
France, but then admitting that she was on vacation in the South Pacific. That problem
was quickly overshadowed by news that she continued to work for the Banco Wiese as a
consultant, receiving $10,000 a month for her work. Karp had often said that she had
stopped working after her husband’s inauguration in July 2001. An added twist to the
story is that the Banco Wiese continues under investigation for ties to the corruption
network spun by former National Security Advisor Vladimiro Montesinos.
The government put on a show for Karp’s return from the South Pacific, with the
President and all but two Cabinet ministers on hand to receive the First Lady at the
airport. Despite the show, Karp was reportedly furious with many high-ranking
government officials, saying they did not back her completely. She lashed out at Peru’s
“ruling class,” saying she was not born rich or with a well-known last name so had to
work. She tried to frame the scandal as a problem of class and machismo.
Just as the issues were dying down, Karp was back in the news again on Sept. 9, lashing
out at political parties. During a relatively innocuous speech about indigenous rights, the
First Lady changed direction and began attacking the country’s political establishment,
saying opposition parties – she used the derogatory term partiduchos, which loosely
translates as insignificant parties – were trying to destabilize the government and bring
down President Toledo. The outcry from the Congress and political leaders was fast and
furious, with some going so far as to threaten her with deportation. 
The Palace immediately went into spin control, saying Karp had been misinterpreted, but
adding that her opinions did not reflect those of the administration. Again furious with
the Cabinet, she slammed Premier Luis Solari and First Vice President Raul Diez
Canseco, telling the Palace staff that the two were part of the process to destabilize the
administration. Several weeks later, Karp would announce her nationalization as a
Peruvian citizen and begin a round of interviews, saying her problems were cultural and
linguistic. Despite more than 30 years speaking Spanish, she said she still has problems
with the language and did not understand the meaning of partiduchos.
The President also had problems with Spanish, with both First Vice President Diez
Canseco and Finance Minister Javier Silva Ruete saying the President gets tonguetwisted
when speaking and that not many people speak Spanish well. The comments
were made after Toledo got into a war of words with the Associated Press news agency
over comments made about Vladimiro Montesinos during a seven-day working trip to the
United States. The President’s high-level meetings with U.S. officials and business
leaders, and pledges of loans from multilateral lending institutions were overshadowed
by the comments that Montesinos could receive special treatment if he supplied certain
information. The President’s comments were taken somewhat out of context, but the slip
up marred the success of the trip.
Diez Canseco said the President never should have made the remarks and that he needed
to be more careful, setting off a firestorm of rumors that he would be quitting the
government. He also criticized Karp, saying she was emotionally drained from years of
campaigning with her husband. Diez Canseco denied that that there was any bad blood
between him and Toledo, but the two men avoided each other. Political analysts see Diez
Canseco, who is also Foreign Trade and Tourism Ministry, attempting to distance himself
from Toledo in case the President leaves office before his term is up in 2006. As First
Vice President, Diez Canseco is first in line to replace the President if he were to leave
office early.
Next came the language problem with Silva Ruete. During a visit to the jungle city of
Iquitos, the President said his administration would not eliminate tax exemptions for the
jungle region, contradicting Silva Ruete. Toledo added that he was running the show and
that “second-level bureaucrats” were not making government policy. Silva Ruete said the
President did not mean to talk about tax exemptions in the “present tense” but in the
“plus perfect,” adding that Spanish was a difficult language to master.
The government also lost support because of price increases, particularly two increases in
fuel prices that led to a ripple effect across the board. The prices of most goods,
especially bread, increased. The government dropped fuel prices by 2 percent, but the
price increases remained.
Finally, Second Vice President David Waisman got involved in the government antics,
criticizing the administration for wasting money on Karp’s nationalization ceremony in
Cusco. Waisman is also one of the three Presidents of Peru Posible. His colleague in the 
Peru Posible ruling team, Housing Minister Carlos Bruce, immediately said the party and
not the government had footed the bill. Waisman also took a few shots at Toledo,
blaming the President for allowing himself to be misguided by Palace advisors.
Topping off a month of government theatrics was a “duel” between Waisman and Rep.
Eittel Ramos (Independent-Callao). Ramos accused Toledo of being surrounded by a
“Jewish” mafia, which set off Waisman, who is Jewish. As the war of words escalated,
Ramos challenged Waisman to a pistol duel to prove who was more manly. While the
legislators reconciled their differences late in the month, the press – including the staterun
El Peruano – used the word “circus” to describe the current state of Peruvian politics.
2.) Citizen security takes center stage
September began with the high-profile kidnapping of Mariana Farkas, wife of Toledo’s
closest ally, Adam Pollack. She was snatched early on the night of Sept. 3 in Lima’s
Lince district. The Administration went into high gear, with Interior Minister Gino Costa
setting up a high-level task force to solve the kidnapping. More than 100 National Police
officers were put on the case. Farkas was rescued three days later from a safe house in
Villa El Salvador, on Lima’s southern edge. National Police Spokespeople said the crime
was solved thanks to telephone communications intercepted between the kidnappers and
inmates at Lima’s Castro Castro Maximum Security Prison.
The kidnapping was followed by a number of other high-profile crimes, including an
armed robbery at the Catholic University of Peru and several business establishments
throughout Lima. Reversing a tight-lipped policy, the National Police reported that there
were more than 300 kidnappings in the first seven months of the year, the majority
“express” kidnappings. A typical express kidnapping involves the spontaneous seizure of
a seemingly well-off individual in a public place; this typically involves forcing the
individual to make multiple withdrawals from ATMs, followed by, sometimes, a visit to
the person’s home for expanded looting.
The quick rescue of Farkas brought support to the National Police in public opinion polls,
with 65 percent of people polled mid-month by Apoyo approving of the police officers’
actions. The approval of the police, however, contradicted another opinion voiced by
voters – that the kidnapping was a government-orchestrated hoax. In the Apoyo poll, 55
percent said they believed the government faked the kidnapping to gain sympathy. The
CPI survey firm registered a similar result. In that poll, 58.8 percent of voters said the
kidnapping was a hoax. While there is no evidence of this, and security experts say
Farkas was indeed kidnapped, the heads of the polling firm say the government’s lack of
credibility has fallen to such low levels that no one believes anything Toledo says.
In response to the kidnapping and other violent crimes, the government unveiled a new
National Commission on Citizen Security on Sept. 11 to design new mechanisms to fight
crime. Initial proposals include eliminating prison benefits for inmates convicted of 
violent crimes, increasing vigilance at maximum security prisons with cameras and
devices to block telephone communications and upping prison sentences.
In addition, William Bratton, former New York City Police Chief, presented his proposal
for citizen security for Lima. Lima Mayor Alberto Andrade had hired Bratton as a
consultant. Among the many warnings in his report, Bratton said that if drastic measures
are not taken soon Lima may well be overrun by crime within the next few years.
3.) Hitting hard at the Shining Path
The National Police’s Anti-Terrorism Bureau (DIRCOTE) announced the arrest of
several members of the Shining Path, who they charged with attempting to reorganize the
Maoist rebels’ committee in Lima. The rebels were accused of participating in the March
20 bombing near the U.S. Embassy, which killed 10 people. Other Shining Path members
were arrested in Chicalyo and Trujillo in the north and Cañete in the south.
The Anti-Terrorism police also led a raid on a major Shining Path camp in the jungle
region of Junin, in the central highlands. The police had been monitoring the camp for
some time. More than 30 buildings were destroyed in the raid. The police managed to
recover important Shining Path literature, including documents that may establish links
with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels. One police officer
was killed and several others injured in the raid.
4.) Nation-wide strike fizzles
There were numerous local and regional protests registered in September, but the
nationwide strike called for Sept. 26 did not pack the wallop organizers had hoped it
would. The country’s major unions and regional defense fronts originally planned the
strike, but organizers began changing their strategy as the strike date approached. The
General Confederation of Peruvian Workers (CGTP) and the Teachers’ Union (SUTEP)
said the Sept. 26 action was not a strike, but a mobilization. A week before the planned
action, members of the CGTP and other unions came to blows in front of the Labor
Ministry over the demands included in the strike.
The strike or mobilization was most successful in the southern departments of Puno,
Arequipa, Huancavelica and Ayacucho. It went basically unnoticed in Lima, despite
some press reports calling it “massive” and “impressive.”
The government deemed the strike a failure and, as with an earlier nationwide protest in
June, was helped in demonizing the protest by comments from the Communist Party of
Peru-Patria Roja. Patria Roja once more called for Toledo to step down and for new
elections to be held. Premier Luis Solari and Interior Minister Gino Costa immediately
used Patria Roja’s comments to portray the strike/mobilization as an attempt to
destabilize the government and not an effort to improve the conditions of workers. 

5.) Controversial ruling by Constitutional Tribunal
The government and business community were caught off guard by a mid-September
ruling from the Constitutional Tribunal ordering the dominant telecommunications
company, Telefonica, to rehire hundred of workers who had allegedly been fired without
just cause. The Tribunal went to length to explain that the ruling was exclusively related
to the case between Telefonica and its labor union, but constitutional lawyers said it
created legal precedent re-establishing absolute labor stability in the country.
The business community said the decision was yet another sign that Peru was not serious
about attracting investment, arguing that the rules of the game were constantly under
review and being changed.
The government attempted to stay out of the debate, but did undertake a few actions to
smooth over problems. President Toledo vetoed a bill that could change the way
telecommunications companies charge customers. Under the bill, charges would have
been by the second and not the minute, which is the current system. Premier Luis Solari
also announced the creation of a high-level commission, which he would head, to work
with Telefonica on outstanding touchy issues. Solari said there was no danger of
changing the privatization contract with Telefonica, which has been operating in Peru for
nearly eight years.
6.) Green light from U.S. on ATPDEA
The U.S. government announced in late September that Peru was indeed eligible for tax
benefits under the Andean Trade Preference and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA),
which takes effect in Oct. 1. Under the act, Peru and other Andean countries can export
more than 6,000 products to the United States tariff free. The other countries certified
were Bolivia and Colombia. Ecuador was put on a waiting list. ATPDEA replaces the
Andean Trade Preferences Act, which expired last December.
Peru’s certification was in doubt because of more than a dozen outstanding disputes with
U.S. companies with interests in the country. The problems run from differences over
patents to complaints that Peru charges too much import duty on microwave popcorn.
President Toledo’s visit to the United States in early September and the work of former
Premier Roberto Dañino, ambassador-designate to the United States, were credited with
helping Peru receiving ATPDEA certification.
The Peruvian government, however, is taking a much more realistic approach to the
ATPDEA. The government is no longer saying the Act will help create 1 million new
jobs or radically change the agriculture sector. The one area that will benefit almost 
immediately is the garment industry, which has witnessed a flood of new orders since
U.S. President George W. Bush signed the ATPDEA in early August.
7.) Positive numbers
The tax agency, SUNAT, predicts that tax collection in September will increase by 10
percent. Private investment firms report that inflation for the month should come in at
about 0.5 percent and the economy is expected to have grown by approximately 3
percent. Official statistics will not be available for several weeks.
Premier Luis Solari said that private investment in the third quarter of the year should
increase by more than 4 percent, reversing a downward trend that began in early 2000.
International financial observers say Peru will register the highest gross domestic product
growth in the region this year, coming in between 3.5 and 4 percent. Most predict that the
country will not have a difficult time meeting its international commitments next year,
thanks to new loans and other mechanisms.
********
ConsultAndes, S.A. 