Confidential and Proprietary
June 15, 2016
CONFIDENTIALITY/NON-DISCLOSURE/DISCLAIMER STATEMENT
This Confidentiality/Non-Disclosure/Disclaimer Statement (“Confidentiality Statement”) governs
all Trans American documents bearing the following declaration:
The information contained in this document is confidential and
proprietary to Trans American and its related entities. The use
and dissemination of this document is governed by the
confidentiality/non-disclosure/disclaimer statement contained on
our website at www.tacustoms.com.
(“Confidentiality Legend”)
Information in a document bearing the Confidentiality Legend (“Confidential Document”) is
confidential, privileged and proprietary to Trans American and its related entities (“Trans
American”) and only for use by the intended recipient. The Confidential Document may not be
used, disclosed, published, disseminated, copied or distributed to any third party other than the
intended recipient without the prior written consent of Trans American which may be withheld in
Trans American’s sole discretion. Under no circumstances may the Confidential Document be
disclosed to a competitor of Trans American.
Additionally, if any technical information is contained in a Confidential Document, it is
understood and agreed that said technical Confidential Document is provided for informational
purposes only. Trans American makes no guarantee that the technical Confidential Document
is complete, reliable, accurate or error-free. While the technical Confidential Document is
provided in good faith, there are no representations or warranties of any nature whatsoever in
respect of the information contained in the technical Confidential Document. For the avoidance
of doubt, any representations and warranties relative to the technical Confidential Document are
specifically disclaimed. Furthermore, under no circumstances shall the technical Confidential
Document be construed to constitute legal or other professional advice, including but not limited
to specific advice on transportation or customs laws, rules and/or regulations. The technical
Confidential Document is provided as a general statement on the subject matter as understood
by Trans American, which understanding may not necessarily be factually, legally or technically
accurate. However, its specific application will depend on the unique facts and circumstances
of the situation.
Trans American, its officers, directors, employees and/or agents shall not be liable for the use or
reliance on the opinions, information and/or findings contained in any Confidential Document.
Additionally, under no circumstances shall Trans American be liable for any special, direct,
indirect, incidental and/or consequential damages relating to any use and/or consideration of
and/or reliance upon any Confidential Document. 